templates/commands/constitution.md, before:

---
description: Create or update the project research constitution with scientific context, data sources, and analysis standards.
handoffs:
  - label: Build Specification
    agent: speckit.specify
    prompt: Create a specification for analysis based on this constitution. I want to analyze...
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

You are updating the project research constitution at `/memory/constitution.md`. This file defines the scientific context, core principles, and standards for the project. Your job is to collect concrete details from the user and fill in the template.

Follow this execution flow:

1. Load the existing constitution at `/memory/constitution.md`.
   - Identify placeholder tokens in square brackets (e.g., `[PROJECT_NAME]`, `[DATA_SOURCES]`).

2. Collect values for each section:
   - If user input supplies details, use them.
   - Otherwise, infer from existing repo context (README, existing scripts, data files).
   - For sections the user hasn't addressed, ask focused questions or mark as `[TODO: description]`.

3. Section-specific guidance:

   **Research Context**: Get the big picture - what questions, why this matters, who uses the outputs.

   **Data Sources**: For each source, capture: name, access method, coverage, known issues. Scientists often underspecify this - probe for details.

   **Technical Environment**: Check for existing environment files (requirements.txt, environment.yml, pyproject.toml). If found, summarize. If not, ask what they're using.

   **Coordinate Systems & Units**: Critical for earth science. Ask explicitly about spatial reference systems, time handling, and missing data conventions.

   **Figure Standards**: Ask about target venue (journal, presentation) to inform format/resolution. Suggest colorblind-safe palettes if not specified.

   **Quality Checks**: Ask what validations would catch errors in their specific data type.

   **Project Notes**: Probe for constraints that might not be obvious - data embargoes, collaborator agreements, deadlines.

4. Draft the completed constitution:
   - Replace placeholders with concrete text.
   - Keep HTML comments as guidance unless the user asks to remove them.
   - Use clear, direct language - this is a working document, not a legal contract.

5. Consistency check:
   - If `/memory/spec.md` exists, verify data sources and scope align.
   - If analysis scripts exist, verify stated environment matches actual dependencies.
   - Flag any inconsistencies to the user.

6. Write the completed constitution to `/memory/constitution.md`.

7. Summarize for the user:
   - What sections are complete vs. marked TODO.
   - Any inconsistencies found.
   - Suggested next steps (e.g., "Run `speckit specify` to create your first analysis spec").

If the user provides partial updates, focus on those sections but still scan others for obvious gaps.

If critical information is missing and you can't infer it, insert `[TODO: what's needed]` rather than guessing.

Commit message:

constitution: ask questions one at a time for guided UX

templates/commands/constitution.md, after:

---
description: Create or update the project research constitution with scientific context, data sources, and analysis standards.
handoffs:
  - label: Build Specification
    agent: speckit.specify
    prompt: Create a specification for analysis based on this constitution. I want to analyze...
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

You are updating the project research constitution at `/memory/constitution.md`. This file defines the scientific context, core principles, and standards for the project. Your job is to collect concrete details from the user and fill in the template.

## Interaction Style

**IMPORTANT**: Ask questions ONE AT A TIME. Do not dump all questions at once.

- After asking a question, STOP and wait for the user's response.
- Once they answer, update `/memory/constitution.md` with that section, then ask the next question.
- This creates a guided conversation rather than an overwhelming list.

**Exception**: If the user provides substantial context in their initial input (after the command), use it to pre-fill what you can. Then only ask about gaps, still one question at a time.

**Progress saving**: After each answer, write the updated section to the file so progress is saved even if the conversation is interrupted.

Follow this execution flow:

1. Load the existing constitution at `/memory/constitution.md`.
   - Identify placeholder tokens in square brackets (e.g., `[PROJECT_NAME]`, `[DATA_SOURCES]`).
   - Check what's already filled in vs. what needs input.

2. If user provided context upfront:
   - Pre-fill as many sections as possible from their input.
   - Write the partial constitution to the file.
   - Identify remaining gaps and ask about them ONE AT A TIME.

3. If user provided no context (or minimal):
   - Start with the first section (Research Context).
   - Ask ONE focused question about that section.
   - Wait for response, update file, then move to next section.

4. Section-specific guidance:

   **Research Context**: Get the big picture - what questions, why this matters, who uses the outputs.

   **Data Sources**: For each source, capture: name, access method, coverage, known issues. Scientists often underspecify this - probe for details.

   **Technical Environment**: Check for existing environment files (requirements.txt, environment.yml, pyproject.toml). If found, summarize. If not, ask what they're using.

   **Coordinate Systems & Units**: Critical for earth science. Ask explicitly about spatial reference systems, time handling, and missing data conventions.

   **Figure Standards**: Ask about target venue (journal, presentation) to inform format/resolution. Suggest colorblind-safe palettes if not specified.

   **Quality Checks**: Ask what validations would catch errors in their specific data type.

   **Project Notes**: Probe for constraints that might not be obvious - data embargoes, collaborator agreements, deadlines.

5. Draft the completed constitution:
   - Replace placeholders with concrete text.
   - Keep HTML comments as guidance unless the user asks to remove them.
   - Use clear, direct language - this is a working document, not a legal contract.

6. Consistency check:
   - If `/memory/spec.md` exists, verify data sources and scope align.
   - If analysis scripts exist, verify stated environment matches actual dependencies.
   - Flag any inconsistencies to the user.

7. Write the completed constitution to `/memory/constitution.md`.

8. Summarize for the user:
   - What sections are complete vs. marked TODO.
   - Any inconsistencies found.
   - Suggested next steps (e.g., "Run `speckit specify` to create your first analysis spec").

If the user provides partial updates, focus on those sections but still scan others for obvious gaps.

If critical information is missing and you can't infer it, insert `[TODO: what's needed]` rather than guessing.
